this presentation is delivered by the
Stanford center for professional
development so good morning and welcome
back um what I want to do today is
actually begin a new chapter in 229 in
which um I'm going to start to talk
about unsupervised learning so um brief
outline for today is I'm going to just
very briefly talk about clustering let's
talk about C's algorithm um let's talk
about the mixture of Gan model and the
special case of the EM expectation
maximization ALB for the mixture of Gans
model um described something called
gance inequality and then we'll use that
to to derive um a general form of of
something called the em or expectation
maximization algorithm which is very
useful algorithm that sort of turns out
to be used all over the place in
different um unsupervised machine
learning
applications
[Applause]
so you know the standard cartoons that I
used to draw for supervised learning was
um if you're given a data set like
this right and you use you know logistic
regression or sbm or whatever to
classify between the positive and
negative classes and we called this
supervised learning because you know
you're sort of told what the right
Clause label is for every training
example um and that was the
Supervision in unsupervised learning we
a slightly different
problem you're given a data
set that maybe just comprises a set of
points just given a data set with no
labels and no indication of what the
quote right answer is or what the
supervision is and um is a job of the
algorithm to discover structure in the
data um so in this lecture in the next
couple of weeks we'll talk about a
variety of unsupervised learning
algorithms they can look at data sets
like these and discover various
different types of structure in it um in
this particular cartoon that I've drawn
you one type of structure that you and I
can probably see is that this data lives
in two different class
and so um the first unsupervised
learning algorithm that I'm actually
going to talk about will be a clustering
algorithm it will be an algorithm that
looks a data set like this and um
automatically breaks the data set into
different smaller
clusters
um
so let's see my laptop comes back up
I'll show you an example um so
clustering algs like these have um a
variety of applications um
just to Rattle off a few of the better
known ones I guess in bi biology
application you often clust different
things together we have data on genes
you may cluster different genes together
in order to examine them and understand
the biological function better um
another common application of clustering
is market research so imagine you have a
c you have a customer database of how
your different customers behave um very
common practice to apply clustering
algorithms to break your database of
customers into different market segments
so that you can you know Target your
products towards different market
segments or Target your sales pictures
specifically to different market
segments um some you do later today I I
don't want to I don't do this now but um
if you actually go to a website like
news.google.com
um that's an example of a website that
uses a clustering algorithm to um
everyday group related news articles
together to display to you so that you
can see you know what of the Thousand
news articles today on whatever the top
story of today and what are the 500 news
articles on all the different websites
on different story of the day um at a
very start of class actually talks about
image segmentation which is the example
which is the application of when you
might um take a picture and group
together different subsets of the
picture into coherent pieces of of of
pixels um to try to understand what's
contained in the picture so that's a yet
another application of clustering um but
the basic idea is given a data set like
this given a set of points can you
automatically group the data set into um
into coherent
clusters
so let's see I'm so of waiting for the
laptop to come back so show you an
example you know what let me just well
what's coming up want me just start to
write out the specific clustering
algorith and I'll show the animation
later
um
so this is called the K means clustering
algorithm for finding clusters in your
data set
um the input to your algorithm will be
an unlabeled data set which I write as
X1
X2 after XM and because we're now
talking about UNS supervised learning
you see a lot of data sets that look
like these with just the x's and no
class labels y so what a camean
algorithm does is the following and this
will all make a bit more sense when I
show you the um animation on on my
laptop um it's going to initialize a set
of cluster initialize a set of points
called the cluster
centroids
um mu1 through mu
K randomly and so if your uh input so of
training data are vectors in r n then
your cluster centroids these M's will
also be um vectors in
RN and then you
repeat until
convergence the following two steps
um
excuse me so the excuse me the cluster
centroids will be your guesses for where
the centers of each of the Clusters are
and so um in one of the steps you you
know look at each point XI and you look
at which cluster centroid muj is closest
to it and then you this step is called
assigning your point XI to Cluster J
right inste of looking at each point and
picking the cluster centroid that's
closest to it and the other step
is you update the cluster
centroids to be the mean of all the
points that have been assigned to
it
um
so okay let me
just
um let's see actually can I could you
please bring down the display from the
[Music]
laptop
oops excuse
me
light
okay there we
go
okay so here's an example of the C's
algorithm hopefully with this animation
this this will make more sense this is a
the names chopped off this this
particular example I got from Michael
Jordan in Berkeley so these points in
green on my uh data points and so I'm
going to
randomly initialize a pair of cluster C
chice so the red and the blue crosses
denote the positions of mu1 and mu2 say
if I'm going to guess it two clusters in
this data so
um Step K means excuse me STS K means Al
as follows I'm going to repeatedly go to
all of the points in my data set and I'm
going to um associate each of the green
dots with the closer of the two closer
centroids so um visually I'm going to
denote that by you know painting each of
the dots either blue or red depending on
which is the closer closest Android okay
so all the points closest to the blue
Crosser Point are painted blue and so on
um the other step is updating the
cluster centroid and so I'm going to
repeatedly look at all the points that
painted blue and um compute the average
of all of the blue dots and I'll simply
compute look at all the red dots and
compute the average of all the red dots
and then I'll move the cluster croise as
follows to the average of the respective
locations so this is now after one
iteration of K means um here
and now repeat the same process I look
at all the points and assign all the
points closer to the Blue Cross to be
you know the color blue and and simly
red and so now I have thata assignments
of points to the cluster
centroids and um finally I'll again
compute the average of all the blue
points and compute the average of all
the red points and update the cluster
centr again as
follows and um now K means has actually
converge if you keep running you know
these two steps of K means over and over
the cluster centroids and the
assignments of the points of the cluster
centroids where I should remain the same
yeah yeah answer that in a
second
okay so um just going switch back to CH
for
[Music]
pleas
so actually let just take a take a
second to look at this again and make
sure you understand how this maps on to
um uh how the how the um equ how the Alm
I wrote How It maps onto the animation
you just saw is a
question I see okay let me let me also
answer that a
second okay so these are two steps this
step 2.1 was assigning the points to
close to centroid and 2 point two was
Shifting the cluster centroids to be the
mean of all the points assigned to that
cluster centroid right um okay so
briefly answer the two questions I just
had one is does the Alum converge um the
answer is yes C is guaranteed to
converge in a certain sense in
particular if you
define
um if you define the Distortion function
to be J of C comma
mu um squared excuse me if you define
the Distortion function to be a function
of the cluster assignments and cluster
centroids and this is the sum of square
distances between the points and the
cluster CID that they're assigned to
then um you can show I won't really
prove this here but um you can show that
K means is coordin
asent on the function
J um in particular remember we talked
about coordinate Ascent as an
optimization algor like I don't know
maybe about two weeks ago um so
coordinate Ascent is the algum that will
repeatedly hold cix and optimize with
respect to Mu or hold mu fix and op with
respect to C right so that's C in the
sense and so what you can prove is go
home and prove this yourself um is that
K means the two iterative steps of K
means are exactly optimizing this
function with respect to C and with
respect to mu
alternat and therefore um uh this
function J of C comma mu must be
decreasing monotonically on every
iteration and so the sense that in which
K converges is that D function JFC comma
mu can only go down and
therefore this function will actually
eventually converge in the sense that it
will not it will stop going down okay um
is actually possible that there may be
you know several clusterings that give
the same value of J of C comma mu and so
K means may actually switch back and
forth between different clusterings if
they if in the in the S of really in the
extremely unlikely case that the
multiple clusterings that give exactly
the same value for this objective
function K means May oscillate between
um in practice that just about never
happens um but but but but even if that
happens you know dysfunction JFC comma M
will
converge um that question is Guess How
do you choose the number of clusters so
it turns out that um I think in in the
vast majority of time when people apply
K Mees you you sort of just manually
pick a number of clusters or you
manually try a few different numbers of
clusters and um um uh you know pick the
one that seems to work best um the
number of clusters in this album is sort
of just one parameter so usually I think
it's not very hard to choose
automatically um there are some
automatic ways for choosing the number
of clusters but but I I'm so I'm not
going to talk about them when when I do
this I usually just pick the number of
clusters manually and the reason is um I
think for many clustering problems the
quote true number of clusters is
actually ambiguous so for example if you
have a data set that looks like
this
you know some of you may see four
clusters right and some of you may see
two clusters and so the right answer for
the actual number of clusters is sort of
ambiguous um so I
yeah yeah what if you were to initialize
your clusters way so that one of the
Clusters is far away from the data point
couldn't your could your algorithm
converts to clustering all the points in
the same same
clust um I see right so yes K means is
susceptible to local optim eror so
coordinat so um this function JFC comma
mu is a highly non-convex this is not a
convex function and so um K means so
coordin Sense on the non-convex function
is not guaranteed to converge the global
minimum so K means is susceptible to um
uh what is susceptible to local optimer
and um if you're an application in which
where you think C might be running into
local optimer one thing you can do is
try multiple random
initializations and then run clustering
a bunch of times and then and pick the
solution that ended up with the lowest
value for the Distortion
function
yeah one of the cids is
eliminated um yeah again there are sort
of
uh let's see right so what if one clust
the central has no points assigned to it
then one thing you could do is just
eliminate it exactly the saying another
thing you can do is um uh just re
initialize it randomly if you really
want K
clusters L questions
yeah Norm as a norm or like can you take
also the one Norm or the infinity Norm
or I see right is it usual is it usually
take two Norms so um let's see for the
vast majority of applications are seen
for k me you do take two Norm when you
have data and RN um I'm sure there are
others who have taken Infinity norm and
one Norm as well I I I personally
haven't seen that very often but you can
also yeah there there there other there
there other variations in this ALG that
use different Gomes but this is what I'm
what I'm descri is probably the most
commonly use
variant
okay so that was
um came
clustering
um what I want to do next and um this
will take longer to describe is actually
talk about a closely related problem
[Music]
um in particular what I want to do is
talk about density
estimation so
so um as Mo example this is a problem
that I know some guys that works on um
let's say you have aircraft engine
rolling off an assembly line so you
let's say you work for an aircraft
company You're Building aircraft engines
they roll off your assembly line and um
as the aircraft engines roll off the
assembly line you test these aircraft
engines and measure various different
properties of it and you know to use a
simplii example I'm going to write these
properties as heat and vibrations right
in reality you measure different
vibrations and different frequencies and
so on we just write you know the amounts
of heat produced vibrations produced
um let's say
that um you get us so if you have a data
set like this you could run a clustering
algorthm and characterizes as two
clusters but maybe you get a data set
that you know I don't know that maybe
looks like that and what you would like
to do is estimate the density of these
properties of the The Joint distribution
of the amount of heat produced and
amount of vibrations um because you
would like to say detect outliers so
that as a new aircraft engine rolls off
the assembly line you can then measure
you know the same heat and vibration
properties you ALS if you get a point
there you can then ask How likely is it
that there was an undetected flow in
this aircraft engine and it it needs
under go undergo further inspections and
so um if we look at you know look at the
typical distribution of features we get
um can we build a model for p of
X and then if um P of X is very small
for some new aircraft engine then that
will raise a red flag we'll say there's
an anomalous aircraft engine and we
should you know subject it to further
inspections before we let someone fly
the engine okay so um this particular so
this particular problem I just described
is an instance of what's called anomaly
detection and so a common way of doing
anomaly detection is to take your
training set um again just your
unlabeled examples X1 through
XM and from this data set build the
model P ofx of the density of um the
data so the typical data you're seeing
and if you ever then see an example with
very low probability on the P of X then
you may flag that as an anomalous
example okay um so anomal detection is
also used in you know security
applications you know figure out
something is doing something unusual at
a physical plant or in your computer
system um is used for detecting fraud in
transactions if if you know if my if
someone thought if my credit card if if
many very unusual transactions St to
appear on my credit card that's a sign
that maybe someone stole them my credit
card um and what I want to do now is
talk with specific algorithm for density
estimation um and in particular one they
work for data sets like these two that
you know this distribution this
distribution like that right let's get
of that distribution like this doesn't
really fall into any of the standard
textbook distributions this is not
really like a g or a proone explanation
or anything so uh can we come with a
model to estimate densities that may
look like these somewhat unusual
shapes so
um
to describe the a bit more I'm actually
going to use a onedimensional example
rather than a 2d example um and the and
in the example I'm going to describe I'm
going to say
that going to imagine that
um maybe a data set that looks like this
where the horizontal axis here is the
x-axis and you know these Dot represent
the the the positions of the data set
that I have Okay so this data set looks
like it's maybe coming from a
density that looks like that um as if
this were the sum of two Gan
distributions and so the specific model
I'm going to describe next is a will be
what's called a mixture of gan's model
um and just to be
clear the picture I have is that we're
envisioning that
there were two separate gaussians they
generated that maybe there were two
separate Gans that generated this data
set and if only I knew what the two Gans
were then I could fill the g into my
crosses fill the g into the O's and then
you know sum them
up right to get the overall density for
the two but um the problem is I don't
actually have access to these labels I
don't actually know which of the two
gaussians each of my data points came
from and so um what I like to do is to
come up with an
algorithm to fit this mixture of gan's
model um even when I don't know which of
the two Gans each of my data points came
from yeah have no idea what this is let
get rid of
it okay so here's the
idea
in this model I'm going to
[Music]
imagine
um there's a latent random
variable um and latent just is is just
synonymous with hidden or
unobserved
okay so I'm going to imagine that is um
latent random variable Z and um x i
comma Z I have a joint
distribution that is given as follows
um we have that P of x x i comma
Z well by the uh Cham R of
probability this is always like that
right this is always
true and moreover I'll assume that P of
Z is given by the following Z is
distributed
momal um with parameters Pi
um
in the special case where I have just a
mixture of two galum then Z will be
beri um and so you
know and these parameters five are the
parameters of a multinomial
distribution and um the distribution of
XI conditioned on Z being equal to J so
so P of XI given as Z is equal to J
that's going to be a galaxian
distribution with mean mu J
and Co variant Sigma J
okay um so this should actually look
extremely familiar to you what I've
written down are pretty much these are
not not quite but almost the same
equations as I wrote down for the
gussian discriminant analysis algorithm
that we saw way back right except that
the difference is um instead of I guess
supervis learning were where we were
given the class labels y I've now
replaced why in Gan discrimin analysis
of these latent random variables or
these unobserved random variables Z and
we don't actually know what the values
of Z are
okay
so
um so just to make the link to gussan
discrimin analysis even even a little
more explicit right um if we knew what
the Z's
were um which which we actually don't
but you know supposed for the sake of
argument that we actually knew which of
say the two Gans each of our data points
came from then um you can use maximum
likelihood
estimation
right you can write down the likelihood
or the log likelihood of the parameters
which would be
that and um you can then use Maxim
likely
estimation you know and you get exactly
the same formulas as in Gan discrimin
analyses
right
okay so if you knew the values for Z you
can write down the log likelihood um and
do maximum likelihood this way and you
can then estimate all the parameters of
your
model um does this make sense raise your
hand if this makes
sense yeah okay cool some of you did
some of you have questions some of you
didn't raise your hand yeah so each Z is
it's just a label like an X or an o oh
yes were there other
questions
okay
so right so if you knew the CLA label if
if if you knew the values of Z's Z
playing a similar role to the CL labels
in Galan disc analysis then you could
use M then you could use maximum likely
estimation of the
parameters um but in reality we don't
actually know the values of the Z's all
we're given is this unlabeled data set
and so let me WR write down a specific
bootstrap procedure in which the idea is
that um we're going to use our model to
try to guess what the values of Z is so
we don't know the Val of Z but we'll
just take a guess at the values of Z and
um we'll then use you know so the values
of Z that we guess to fit the parameters
of the rest of the model and then we
actually should iterate and now that we
have a slightly better estimate for the
parameters of the rest the model we'll
then take another guess for what the
values of Z are and then we'll sort of
use something like the maxim lik
estimation formulas to F even better
setting of paramis with the
model
so
so the Al I'm going to write down is um
called the EM
algorithm and it proceeds as
follows um repeats onto
convergence in the esep we're going to
guess the
values of the unknown zis and in
particular I'm going to
set wi
J okay so I'm going to compute the
probability that Z is equal to J so I'm
going to use the rest of the parameters
of my model I'm going to compute the
probability that um Point
XI came from Gan number
J um and just to be S of concrete about
what I mean by this this means that I'm
going to compute P of
XI this step is um sort of by Bas zero I
guess
um and and again just be completely
concrete about what I mean by this the
numerator P of XI given Z equals J you
know well that's the gussian density
right that's
over e to
the right that's P of x i given zal J
time P of Z equals
J um that is just equal to f j and then
divide it by you know sum from Lal
1 to K of so the same thing of of of you
essentially the same thing but with J
replaced by L okay so you plug in the
formula for the gcia in the numerator
and the sum over similar terms in the
denominator excuse me this is a sum
from
well some from Lal 1 through K in the
denominator
um
okay let's take
[Applause]
the let's
see so that was the first half of the
algorithm um the other step is the m
step
um the maximization step where you would
then update your estimates of the
parameters so I'll just write down the
formulas here um when you see these you
should compare them to um the formulas
we had for maximum likelihood
estimation
like so and
um
so
um these two formulas on top are very
similar to what you saw for G discre
analysis except that now um we have
these soft weights so wij is you
remember was the probability we computed
that point I came from you know gaussian
Al so of quote I don't want to call it
cluster J but let's call it Point
probably the point time came from
gussian J um rather than an indicator
for where the point I came from Gan J
right and
um the one slight difference between
this and one one one other sort of
difference between this and the forms we
have Gan disc analysis is that in the
mixture of Gans we often we more
commonly use different coari matrices
for the different Gins so in Gin discre
analysis so by convention you usually
model all all of the classes of the same
covariance Matrix Sigma um when you fing
mixes of Gans models is is sort of uh
not always but sometimes you allow the
covariance Matrix for your different
Gans to vary and so represent on the
formulation we have a different ciance
Matrix Sigma J for every calcium and
that's the corresponding way of
estimating it okay so I just wrote down
a lot of equations let just take a
second to look at this and make sure it
all makes
sense good questions about
this
[Applause]
raise your hand if this makes intuitive
sense why this seems reasonable by
analogy to GDA yeah okay only some of
you
um let's
see so let try to explain that a little
bit more um so recall in Gan discri
analysis right if we knew if well or
rather if we knew the values for the zis
so
um let's
see suppose I was to give you a label
data set supposed I were to tell you the
values of the zis for each example then
not be giving you a data set that looks
like this
right right so here's my 1D data set
that's sort of a typical 1D G discre
analysis problem and so um for G discre
analysis we we figured out the maximum
likelihood estimation the maximum
likelihood estimate for the parameters
of
GDA and um you know one of the estimates
for the parameters for GDA was um FJ
which is the
probability right that
um I guess Z equals
J you know you would estimate that as
sum over IAL sum over I from 1 to M
indicator
zal
J divide by n okay um when we when we
have when we're deriving GDA we wrote y
instead of Z right but if you knew the
class labels for every example in your
class then this was your maximum likely
estimate for the chance that um your
labels came from the positive CLA versus
the negative CLA it's just the fraction
of example you maximum like could
estimate for the you know probability of
getting an example from class J is just
just the fraction of examples in your
trading set that actually came from
class J so this is a maxim likely
estimation for G disc
analysis now in the mixture of
gaussian's model in in the EM problem we
don't actually have these class labels
right we just have an unlabeled data set
like this you just have a set of
dots just I'm trying to draw the same
data set as I had above but just with
the Clause labels
removed so now is as
if you only get to observe the X
eyes but the Z
eyes are unknown
right so the class labels
unknown so in the EM
algorithm we're going to try to take a
guess for the values of the
zis and specifically typically um in the
Eep we
computed you know wij was our current
best guess for the probability that Z
equals
J given that data point okay so this
just means given my current hypothesis
so where the gaussians are and given
everything else um can I compute the
posterior probability what is the
posterior probability that the point XI
actually came from class J what what
what is the probability that this point
was a cross versus o what's the probity
that this point was a cross versus of O
and so
on and now in the M
step my formula for estimating the you
know for for for trying to estimate my
parameters 5j will be given by 1 / M sum
from I = 1 through M sum of w i
j okay and so the WIS here you know play
the role of um soft versions I guess of
of these indicated functions so wi J is
right the probability is my best guess
for the probability that point I belongs
to um Gan or belongs to CL J and um so
so I'll estimate my 5j using this
formula instead of this
one okay and um similarly this is my
formula for the estimate for muj and if
you replace the WIS with these indicator
functions you get back to the formula
that you had in G Indus
analysis does this make some more sense
just I'm trying to just convey an
intuitive sense of why this algor would
make sense can you raise your hand if
this makes sense
now
okay um okay
so that's the intuition of the EM
algorithm um it turns out that the way I
came up with these formulas is actually
via slightly more General principle V
via more General version of the EM
algorithm which is what I'm going to
talk about next so sort of I hope so so
hope so I guess hopefully these
equations making two to sense but
exactly where they came from is an
answer is a question I have answer a
little bit later
okay
so
so what I want to do now is actually
um present a broader view of the EM
algorithm um what you just saw was a
special case of the EM algorithm for
specifically the mixture of gan's model
um in the remaining half hour I have
today I'm going to describe a General
view of
the the what the general description of
the EM algorithm and everything you just
saw will be derived s of as a special
case of this more General view that I'll
present now um
and as a precursor to actually
presenting this to to deriving this more
General view of the EM algorithm um we
going to have to describe something
called Jensen's inequality which we used
in the
derivation um so here's Jensen's
inequality which is let F be a convex
function
um so a function is convex of a second
derivative which I've written F prime or
F prime prime is greater than zero right
functions don't don't have to be
differentiable to be convex but if it
have has a secondary Conservative then
frime Prime should be greater than
zero um and let X be a random
variable
[Music]
then um the F applied to the expectation
of X is less than or equal to the
expectation of f ofx okay um and I hope
you remember I often I'll drop the
square brackets so F of e of X is you
know this is the same as F of the
expected value of x but when I'm writing
expectations I often drop the square
brackets
um so let me draw a picture that will
explain
this and I think so many many many of my
friends and I often you know don't
remember so is this less than or greater
than or whatever and and the way to
remember remember this is is the way
many of us remember the sign um of that
inequality is by drawing exact the
following picture
so right here's a
function here's a function f
ofx and
um
see
okay um for this example let's say x is
equal to 1 with probability 12 and X is
equal to 6 with probability 12 okay so
this a illustrate this inequality with
an
example
um
so let's see so X is 1 with probability
1/2 and X is 6 with probably 1
and so the expected value of x is 3.5
right it'll be in the middle
here so that's the expected value of x
right the the the horizontal axis here
is the x
axis and so um f of the expected value
of
x you can read off as this point here so
this is f of the expected value of
x whereas in contrast let's see if x is
equal to
then well you know here's F of
one and if x equal to
6 then here's F of
and the expected value of f
ofx it turns
out is now averaging on the vertical
axis right with 50% chance um
with 50% chance um you get F of one with
50% chance you get F of six and so the
expected value of f ofx is the average
of f of one and F of 6 which is going to
be you know the value in the middle
here and so in this example you see that
you know the expected value of f ofx is
greater than or equal to F of the
expected value of x okay and um so an
illustration of why G in equality holds
in this case
[Applause]
um um and it turns out that
um
further if um f Prime of X exists and is
strictly greater than zero um if this
happens we say f is strictly
convex then the inequality holds of
equality or in other words e of f
ofx equals F of
X you know if and only if x is a
constant right with probability one well
I guess I should write
well another way of writing this is xals
e
x okay so in other words if f is a
strictly convex function then the only
way for this inequality to hold with
equality is if the random variable X you
know always takes on the same value if x
is equal to expect the value of probably
one is the is is one we're stating
it um
further um s State everything for convex
functions um turns out that if F Prime
is less than equal to zero so if f is
concave
say
um then everything holds but with the
direction of the inequality reverse so F
of e x is greater than equal to
e of
FX Etc okay so just if you have a
concave function then um all the
inequalities held the same way but just
with the direction of the inequality of
reverse um and it turns out later on
when we derive the EM algorithm we
actually use the concave version with
with this with this inequality
reverse um okay the questions about
this
yeah oh other what is the strictly this
oh I couldn't hear that what is what oh
what is the strictly
convex oh oh I see if F Prime of X is
strictly greater than zero that's my
definition for strictly convex um if if
the second derivative of x is strictly
greater than zero that's what it means
for f to be strictly
convex I see sure so um for example
um this is an example of a convex
function that's not strictly convex
because there's po function is a
straight line and so um f Prime will be
zero in this portion so um so for
example a quadratic function would be
strictly convex
um uh let's see yeah just a less form we
saying strictly convex just means that
you can't have a convex function within
a straight line portion and then another
straight it's speaking very informly and
think of this as meaning that there
aren't any straight line portions um
okay
so here's the derivation for um you the
general version of
em
um the problem we face is as follows we
have some
model right we have some model for the
joint distribution of x and
z um but we
observe only X
and our goal is
to um
maximize
um the log likelihood of the parametes
of a
model right so um we have a model for
the joint distribu ution for x and z and
our goal is to find the maximum likel
estimate of the parameters Theta where
um the likelihood is defined as you know
Su from 1 to M log of the probity of a
data as
usual
um and P of X parameterized by Theta is
now given by um a sum over all the
values of
Z right P of x i
T parameterized by Theta okay so this is
by it's by taking out model of the joint
distribution of x and z and
marginalizing out Z that we get p of x i
parameterized by
Thea and so
[Applause]
um the EM algorithm will be a way of
Performing this maximum likelihood
estimation problem okay which is
Complicated by the fact that we have
these zis in our model that are
unobserved
um
so before I do the math um here's a
useful picture to keep in
mind so the horizontal axis in this
Caron is the Theta axis and there some
function you know the log likelihood of
theta that we're trying to
maximize okay and um usually maximizing
L of theta you know by taking
derivatives and saying the zero that
would be very hard to do what the EM Alm
will do is the following um let's you
initialize the some value Theta 0 what
the EM alv will end up doing is it will
construct a lower Bound for this log
likelihood
function and this lower bound will be
tight when other there a hold of
equality um at your current guess of the
parameters and we then maximize this
lower bound with respect to Theta so
we'll end up with say that value so so
that will be Theta 1 okay and then em Al
look at Theta 1 and they'll then
construct the new lower
bound um on L of theta and it'll
maximize that say you jump here so
that's index Thea 2 and we'll do that
again to get to Thea
3 the 4 and so on until you converge to
to a local Optimum On The Log likelihood
function Okay so so this is a cartoon
that you know describes what the EM
album would do so let's actually make
that formal
now
so we want to maximize with respect to
the
sum of I
log Theta um so this is sum over I
log sum overall values of
Z
right
so well I'm going to do is um multiply
and divide by the same thing I'm going
to write this as
Q okay so um I'm going to construct the
probability distribution
Qi that'll be over these lat and random
variables Z and and so you know these Qi
would be a distribution so right each of
the QI greater zero and sum over all the
values of
Z of
Qi will be one so these Q's will be a
prior distribution that I get to
construct okay and I'll and I'll later
go and I I'll later describe my the
specific choice of this distribution Qi
that I'll
make
um so now
you know this Qi is a probability
distribution over the random variable
Z so this in summation is sort of sum
over Z of the probability of Z times
some function of Z and so this in
summation is really an
expectation well is really the expected
value
of that of the thing
inside
right where the expectation is with
respect to the distribution of the
random variable Z drawn from the
distribution Qi right so if so you think
what does it mean to take the expected
value of this formula respect to Z drawn
from a distribution Qi well it's just
sum over all the values of Z of the prob
probility of Z times that function of
Z right I'm seeing some frowning I'm
seeing some frowns you have questions
about
this
okay
um
so right this is the um so the log
function looks like that and it's a
concave
function so that tells us that the log
of e e of X is greater than or equal
to
the expected value of log X by S of the
you know the concave function form of
Jensen's
inequality and so continuing from the
previous expression um we have um what's
this right log of an expectation well
this is Sumari of log of an expectation
that must therefore be greater than or
equal
to the expected
value
of the
log of
that
um okay using jenson's
inquality and lastly just to expand out
this formula again this is equal
to this is equal to
that
okay
yeah
oh how I got from this set to this set
yeah okay so how
this we'll
see
so
well
um here's well let's say let's say I
have some random variable Z right and
you know Z has some distribution written
by denoted
p and let's say it has some function G
of
Z okay then by definition the
expectation the expected value of G of Z
right by definition that's equal to sum
over all the values of Z the probability
of that value of
Z times G of Z right that's that's the
definition of an expectation of a random
variable and so the way I got from this
step
to this step is by using that um so in
particular now
um I'm I've been using the distribution
Qi to denote the distribution of Z so
this is like sum over Z of P of Z * G of
Z right so this thing is you know this
thing plays a row of P of Z and this
thing
here plays a role of G of Z in that in
what I wrote above right and so um this
is just you know the expected value we
respect to a random variable Z drawn
from the distribution Q of G of Z does
that make sense yeah are there other
questions yeah so so in general when
you're doing um maximum likelihood
estimation choose the probability of or
the likelihood of the data um
but in this case you only say
probability of X because you only have
observed X whereas previously we say
probability of x given the labels yeah
right exactly right so right normally in
Maxim
estimation uh we want to choose the
parameters that maximizes the
probability of the data so right and in
this case our data comprises only the
X's so because we don't observe the Z's
and therefore um you know the log
likelihood of our data excuse me the the
log likelihood of parameters is given by
the probability of the data which is log
P of
X right
exactly
okay
um so notice what we've done right we've
um we wanted to maximize the log
likelihood of
theta and what we've done is through
these manipulations we've now
constructed a lower bound on the log
likelihood of
theta and in particular this formula
they came up with we you think of this
as a fun if if you think of this formula
as a function for
Theta then your Theta are the parameters
of your model right if you think of this
as a function of your parameters Theta
what we've just shown is that the log
likelihood of your parameters Theta
is um lower
bounded by this
thing
Okay so we've just um r that cartoon of
repeatedly constructing a lower bound
and optimizing a lower bound so what
we've just done is construct a lower
Bound for the log likelihood for
Theta now the last piece we want for
this lower bound is um we actually want
just inequality to hold with equality
for the current value for Theta right so
just referring back to the previous
cartoon um you know if this was the log
l for Theta we then construct some lower
bound of it that's some function of
theta and if you know and if this is my
current value for Theta then I want my
lower bound to be tight or I want my
lower bound to be equal to the log l of
theta because that's what I need to
guarantee that when I optimize my lower
bound then actually do even better on
the true objective
function
um and so to do that to ensure that this
inequality actually holds true of
equality what I need is going back
through the derivation what I need is in
the step that I use Jensen's
inequality right I need this inequality
to hold with
equality and in particular I'm going to
choose my distrib so this bound holds
true of any probability distribution CU
that I might choose and so what I'm
going to do is I choose my probability
distribution Q to ensure that this
inequality holds true with equality for
a current value for Theta yeah function
is excuse me um yeah great question how
do I know that function is concave
um yeah I don't think I've shown it it
actually turns out to be true from for
all the models will work with uh but I
don't um do I know that the lower Bal is
a concave function of theta I think
you're right in general this may not be
a concave function of theta for many of
the models we work with this will turn
out to be a concave function but that's
not always
true um okay so let me go and now choose
the value for Q and um if refer back to
Jon inequality we said that this
inequality will become an
equality if you know if the random
variable inside is a constant right if
you're taking an expectation with
respect to a constant valued random
variable
so um
what we want is to choose the
distribution Qi so
that
that is equal to constant um and by
constants I mean this is a this takes on
the same
value
for all values of Z okay that no matter
what value of zi you plug in you end up
with the same value for this
ratio um and so you would set Qi of
Z to be proportional
to that right to ensure that this ratio
remains
constant
um but you also know that these zis must
be um uh excuse me this Qi must be a
probability distribution and
so um that sum is equal to one and um I
don't know there's a step or two that I
might be skipping here but you convince
yourself that the choice you should
choose for this is actually equal
to
she this right this the next
one
um so the uh Qi of zis must sum must sum
to one and so you know to Compu you I
just take P of x i z par by Theta and
just normalize the sum to one there is a
step that I'm skipping here to show that
this is always is really the right thing
to do hopefully you just be convinced
it's true um for the actual so two extra
steps I ski is actually written know the
lecture notes
um but so you then
have um the denominator by definition is
that
and so by the definition
of conditional probability Qi of Z is
just equal to P of Z given x i and
parameterized by
Theta
okay and
so
to summarize the algorithm
um the EM algorithm has two steps in the
Eep we set
we choose the distributions Qi so Qi of
z um will set to be equal
to um P of Z given X par by Theta that's
the formula we just worked
out and so by this step we've now
created a lower bound on the log
likelihood function that is now tight at
the current value of
theta and in the M
step we then optimize that lower bound
with respect to our parameters
Theta and specifically take the Alat
respect to Theta of
this
okay and so that's the
um that's the EM algorithm um I won't
have time to do it today but excuse me
probably show this in the next lecture
but the uh em algorithm that I wrote
down for the mixtures of gan's algorithm
is actually a special case of this more
General template where um the Eep and
the M step corresponded so pretty much
exactly to this Eep and this m step I
wrote down
and so right just in pictures
again there's my log likelihood function
it's function of theta um the Eep con
constructs this lower bound and make
sure that it is tight to the current
value of theta that's in my choice of Q
and then the M
step optimizes the lower bound with
respective pars sta okay so um have lot
lotss more to say about this in the next
lecture let's check if there any
questions before we
close Okay cool so let's wrap up for
today and we'll continue talking about
this in the next
seure